Quantifying and Modeling DIY Architectural Paint Application and Appearance
Original BASF White Paper
Abstract
Through consumer focus groups with Do-It-Yourself (DIY) painters, BASF found that application feel and a smooth final appearance are differentiating factors when it comes to DIY’ers overall satisfaction and experience with the paint. However, most often it is not easy to quantify what DIY consumers experience during the painting job. In this work, we correlate what DIY’ers say about paint application with technical measurements by benchmarking >20 commercial paints. For each paint, we measured a variety of physical properties including, viscosity, surface tension, and rotational & elongational rheology; followed by application and appearance properties such as the paint transfer to/from a roller and coating smoothness. Exploratory data analysis was performed on this data to understand both physical and application properties in a more quantitative way. From this we applied partial least squares (PLS) analysis to develop a model that predicts improved paint parameters (rheology, surface tension etc.), which we then used to formulate a paint that gives a better application feel and final appearance. The work includes development of multiple new analytical and application test procedures to analyze different paint properties such as dynamic surface tension or elongational rheology, and relates them to application properties such as paint transfer or final appearance.
Introduction
During the past few years, the BASF Dispersions, Resins, and Performance Additive Team has been engaged in original market research to better understand the Do-It-Yourself (DIY) architectural paint consumer market. The research included consumer focus groups across North America, which showed that DIY consumer satisfaction is largely determined by the experience with the paint, and that “Application” is a differentiating factor. Terms such as Easy, Smooth, Efficient, and Spreadable were mentioned consistently across different focus groups. To better understand such qualitative descriptors and guide new polymer and performance additive product developments, the BASF R&D labs set out to establish correlations between what DIY’ers say about paint application with technical measurements.
I) DIY In Person Rollout Study
An initial in person roll out study was conducted with >50 DIY painters. Each participant painted three pre-primed drywall boards with three different commercially available paints each. The commercial paints were all interior architectural satin paints in the $30–50 price range with different rheology profiles (Figure 1). The study was carried out as a blind randomized experiment with the paints labeled A, B and C. Technical measurements were taken while the painter was applying the paint, including peak & average force applied (using a force gauge mounted behind the drywall), painting time, and weight of paint applied. After painting each drywall, the participants were asked a series of questions including their perception of how easy it was to apply the paint. Further, dry film appearance was rated based on lap-marks, sag/drip-marks, coverage, and overall appearance by a BASF technical panel after the painted boards had dried. Finally, the painter was asked, which paint they preferred overall.
Figure 1. Rheology profiles of commercial paints A, B and C
 
The results of this initial study showed that the largest driving factor for the ease of application and final dry film appearance is the amount of paint/weight applied (Figures 2 and 3). In other words, when a painter could apply more paint to the drywall board, they rated the paint higher in terms of how easy it was to apply, and the dry film appearance was rated significantly better.
Figure 4 shows how amount of paint applied changed between three commercial paints. In this case, the comparison of interest is the difference in applied paint (continuous variable) between three different paints (three different levels of a nominal variable). These type of comparisons are often done via analysis of variance (ANOVA). With ANOVA, one compares the “within sample” variance to “between sample” variance. If the latter is significantly larger than the former (using the appropriate statistical test-F test- and if the appropriate assumptions are held: constant variance across levels (homoscedasticity) and normality of the residuals), then one can say there is a significant difference between the factor levels. Further, when the painter was asked which of the three commercial paints they preferred the most, almost half (48%) preferred paint C over the other two commercial paints.
Table 1. Lists viscosity measurements of all three paints. However, attempting to make conclusions on what paint attributes contributed to the performance of paints C compared to paints A and B was unsuccessful due to the small sample set of only three paints.
Figure 2. Main Effects Plot for Ease of Application
 
Figure 3. Main Effects Plot for Board Rating
 
Figure 4. Amount of paint applied between paints A, B and C
 
Table 1. Paint A, B and C viscosity attributes
	Paint A	Paint B	Paint C
KU (low shear viscosity)	94	106	91
ICI (high shear viscosity)	1.1	1.1	1.1
Brookfield Vis (#2/50)	675	671	689
Yield Point (Poise)	109	145	50
Static Surface Tension	38.0	35.8	35.5
Exploratory data analysis and hypothesis testing
These initial analyses demonstrate the utility of exploratory data analysis (EDA), even prior to any modeling. Often, the tendency of the scientist doing quantitative analysis is to jump directly into models which attempt to map input to output variables. However, a wealth of information can be obtained through proper visualization, and can give a holistic view of the data, as well as direction on which modeling approach(es) should be attempted.
Figures 2-4 show examples of EDA applied to paint data. Main effect plots show how a response of interest changes with a given factor, averaged out over the levels of other factors. The drawback to main effects plots is that they do not give a sense of any interaction effects, present when the effect of one factor depends on the level of another factor. These interaction effects are often quantified through a properly designed experiment (DoE). Boxplots are another very useful tool, showing the spread of categorical variables, often showing quartiles, outliers, etc. Another technique to visualize not only the spread of the data, but also its distribution, is a histogram. The Q-Q also provides a visual route to gauge the distribution of a data set. An example of these latter two plotting strategies are shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5. Histogram (left) and Q-Q (right) of arbitrary temperature data, both displaying the normality of the data set. Plots generated in JMP.
 
While visualization is a powerful approach, depending on the scenario, more definitive questions/answers are often needed about a data set. For instance, we described the use of ANOVA for determining statistically significant differences between greater than two levels of a categorical factor. A plethora of these hypothesis tests are available depending on the circumstances. For instance, the t-test is often used when comparing values between two-levels of a factor. One should be careful, though, when using these hypothesis tests. Too often a test is thrown at data without considering if it is the appropriate test. For example, we spoke of the assumptions needed to carry out an ANOVA test above. Other tests have similar assumptions. For instance, when applying the t-test, the data should be normally distributed. The largest take away is that a careful examination of the data is needed prior to performing hypothesis tests
A limitation of these approaches is that they are univariate: they focus on analyzing one variable at a time. While this is undoubtedly important, most data sets have more than one “factor” associated with them. For instance, Table 1 shows that there are multiple viscosity attributes (multiple factors) which may dictate application properties. In these cases, multivariate methods should be employed, with a common and extremely useful method being regression analysis.
Background Information:
Rheology modifiers are an essential ingredient in water-based paint formulations to achieve the desired paint viscosity, e.g. to prevent pigments from settling to the bottom of the paint can or allow the painter to spread the paint uniformly during application. As illustrated in the rheology (viscosity) curves in Figure 1 the viscosity of a liquid paint changes depending on how much shear is applied. For example, at low shear (e.g. stirring the paint) the paint has a higher viscosity, i.e. feels thicker; vs at higher shear (e.g. brushing, rolling, or spraying) the paint has a much lower viscosity.
II) Benchmarking Study of 20 Commercial Paints
To better understand which physical attributes contribute to DIY consumer satisfaction, a larger benchmarking study was conducted including 20 commercial interior architectural paints. The following physical measurements were recorded for each paint: Low shear viscosity (KU), high shear viscosity (ICI), static surface tensions, dynamic surface tensions (DST), rotational rheology, and elongational rheology. After measuring the physical paint properties for each paint, each commercial paint was roller applied to a drywall board and the dry paint appearance was rated qualitatively by a panel of over 40 judges, based on smoothness, lap marks, and coverage (Picture 1). Further, the smoothness of each paint was measured quantitatively by applying the paint to a clear polyester sheet with a nap roller, letting the sample dry and taking a back-lit digital image of the sample. These images were then used to calculate a roughness value using digital imaging processing software (ImageJ, Figure 6). 2
Above, univariate approaches were discussed. As an extension to this, bivariate techniques are often used to gauge the relationship between two variables. Bivariate plots do this in a visual way (plotting x1 vs. x2); whereas correlation analysis quantifies this relationship. The Pearson Correlation Coefficient (r) is a measure of the strength of the linear relationship between two variables, and ranges from -1 to 1 (-1 means a perfect negative correlation (as x1 goes up, x2 goes down); 1 means a perfect positive correlation; 0 means no linear relationship). The Pearson method is not so robust to outliers; i.e. if an outlier is in the data set, r will be affected. Another option is the Spearman correlation coefficient, which is more robust to outliers. The Pearson correlation coefficient was calculated for the smoothness metrics. Figure 7 illustrates that there is a good correlation between the visual smoothness rating by a panel of judges and measured surface smoothness using the method described above (correlation factor r>0.7). Further, the method using ImageJ gives a better correlation to visual smoothness ratings when compared to existing techniques such as profilometry or other surface image analysis techniques (Table 2). Finally, the amount of paint that is transferred from a paint tray to a roller and subsequently from the roller to a substrate was quantified in controlled lab tests.
Picture 1. Panelists evaluating dry film appearance of commercial paints
 
Figure 6. Schematic of quantitative surface roughness measurement
 
Table 2. Correlation (r) of Qualitative smoothness rating and Quantitative smoothness measurements
	Qualitative
Smoothness
(Panel)	Smoothness
(ImageJ)	Smoothness
(Surface imaging)	Smoothness
(Profilometry)
Qualitative
Smoothness
(Panel)	1	0.70	0.28	0.35
Smoothness
(ImageJ)	0.70	1	0.65	0.60
Smoothness
(Surface imaging)	0.28	0.65	1	0.67
Smoothness
(Profilometry)	0.35	0.60	0.67	1
Figure 7. Visual and measured paint smoothness
 
*Note: Commercial paints in this and subsequent graphs are chosen for illustrative purposes and are not necessarily the same each time
III) Regression Analysis
All the collected data was then used to develop a statistical model to predict paint transfer, paint smoothness, and therefore DIY consumer satisfaction. When developing a predictive model (supervised learning), one must answer various questions prior to modeling. First, what kind of data is available? This is true for independent factors (x variables), but is particularly true for the response(s) of interest (y variables). For instance, is the response categorical in nature (‘good’ vs. ‘bad’, ‘A’ vs. ‘B’ vs. ‘C’)? In cases like this, classification approaches are often utilized, with a common and interpretable method being logistic regression. The physical paint parameters (KU, ICI, static surface tensions, DST, rotational rheology, and elongational rheology) were used as input factors (predictors) and the qualitative smoothness, quantitative smoothness, and paint transfer data were used as response factors. Therefore, in the paint study, regression, not classification, was used.
Still further questions need to be asked prior to modeling. First, what is the ultimate goal of the regression study: do we want to interpret the behavior, or do we want a highly predictive model? Why is this question important? There are a lot of machine learning methods which have garnered a lot of attention in recent years: artificial neural networks, random forest, etc. While these methods do offer the ability to generate quite predictive models using data which may not be suitable for other regression techniques (e.g. learning on images, sparse data, etc.), they come with a large drawback: they are black box. The largest ramification of this is that interpretability goes down. The models can predictively map x to y, but given their complex mapping structure, it is difficult to know precisely how each x variable affects y. An active area of research is tackling this issue and developing methods to obtain this information from black-box models. Some techniques which may be utilized are: partial dependence plots (PDP); individual conditional expectation (ICE) plots; Shapley Additive Explanations (SHAP) values; and Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME).
Another consideration when choosing a model is the size of the data set. This applies to the number of data points (n) and the dimensionality (number of variables, p). The size of the data set will, in part, help guide model choice. For example, typical machine learning models require much more data than, say, multiple linear regression. Conversely, multiple linear regression cannot be used when n<p. Another question one should ask is: what type of response is measured? Above, we spoke of the need for classification when the response data is categorical. Even with numeric data, the response can be continuous data, count data, etc. This in turn will dictate the model (e.g. if you have count data, which is Poisson distributed, one would use Poisson regression).
In our case, understanding the effect of the factors on the smoothness was of primary concern, so interpretability was important. Furthermore, the responses of interest are continuous, the data set is relatively small (n=~20), with a comparable dimensionality (p~=20). Also, correlation analysis was performed on the explanatory variable space, which showed significant correlations between the x variables (multicollinearity).Due to the nature of the data, the focus was on models which can handle i) more predictors than observations and ii) collinearity between the predictors. Partial Least Squares (PLS) models, a latent variable technique which is well suited to “reduce dimensionality”, were the most consistent in describing the data with a relative minimal number of components needed.
Prior to PLS modeling, the x-variables were first centered (for each variable, the mean is computed, and is subtracted from individual observations) and scaled (for each variable, each observation is divided by the standard deviation). This leads to a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1 for each variable prior to modeling. This is needed to remove any effects from differences of units/absolute values between variables. In addition, the response variables were logarithmically transformed to achieve homoscedasticity and normality of the model residuals, a requirement of PLS. Typically, for empirical models, a good practice is to train the model on a fraction of the data (say 75%) and leave the other fraction (25%) for validation purposes. However, given the number of data points, it was decided to use the whole data set for training, and assess model accuracy from the RMSE of the trained model. After these pre-processing steps, the NIPALS algorithm was used to fit the PLS regression model. In PLS, one needs to determine the number of latent factors to keep in the model. This is called hyperparameter tuning, and for the majority of statistical models, this process needs to be performed in order to obtain the most accurate model without overfitting. This relates to the variance-bias tradeoff: hyperparameters leading to a more complex model yield low bias but high variance; the opposite is true with hyperparameters leading to a less complex model. A common way of properly determining hyperparameter values is through k-fold cross-validation, in which the data is split up into k “sections”, the model is trained on k-1 sections, and model error quantified on the hold out section. This is repeated, and the hyperparameters are chosen to minimize the cross-validated prediction error. In this way, the number of latent variables needed for the paint models was determined. However, to obtain decent predictability (Q2 ~ 0.6), outliers had to be identified and removed, i.e. certain samples did not fit the general behavior/chemistry of the majority.
The models were then used for multiobjective optimization to predict the physical paint parameters that result in the highest paint transfer and best dry film appearance. Multiobjective optimization is difficult in practice: often, when we improve the value of one response, another response suffers. There are several methods used in practice to approach this dilemma. A common one, and the approached used in this study, was to optimize a desirability function. Desirability combines all responses into a single objective function, and sets weights and bounds on each response in order to try and hit feasible solutions. Other, more complex (yet holistic) approaches can be used, including Pareto optimization. The optimization predicted that a paint exhibiting the following will have optimum paint transfer and dry film appearance
i. High ICI
ii. High KU
iii. Elongational rheology profile with a fast reduction in filament diameter
iv. Newtonian rotational rheology profile (lower yield point with less shear thinning at higher shear).
Note that the predictions are made within the range of the data set. For example, the range of KU and ICI for the 20 commercial paint samples were from 91–110 and 0.6–1.6 respectively. Therefore, the model suggests a KU ~110 and ICI ~1.6. Also note, for this data set neither static nor dynamic surface tension were significant variables in predicting the paint transfer and dry film smoothness.
IV) Choosing the right Rheology Modifier Package
To identify a suitable rheology modifier package that would allow us to formulate the paint suggested by the model, the rotational & elongational rheology profiles of >20 different rheology modifier packages were collected. Each paint formulation contained two different rheology modifiers, usually a low-shear plus a high-shear, or a mid-shear plus a high shear rheology modifier. Not unexpectedly, the rheology profiles between the paint formulations with different thickener packages showed significant differentiation. For example, Figures 8 and 9 show the rotational and elongational rheology curves of Rheovis® AS 1237 in combination with Rheovis® HS 1303 (orange curve) compared to of Rheovis® AS 1188 in combination with Rheovis® PE 1331 (blue curve). According the model developed above, the Rheovis ® AS 1188 / Rheovis® PE 1331 would be more desirable in this particular formulation, since it shows a more Newtonian fluid behavior on the rotational rheometer and has a faster filament reduction on the HAAKE CaBER rheometer.
Figure 8. Rotational rheology profile of an all-acrylic latex paint formulation with two different Rheology modifier packages
 
Figure 9. Elongational rheology profile of an all-acrylic latex paint formulation with two different Rheology modifier packages
 
V) Model Paint Formulation and Rollout Study
The insights gained above were then used to formulate two paints. The first paint was formulated to a low KU (90), high ICI (1.5), an elongational rheology profile with a fast reduction in filament diameter, and a Newtonian rotational rheology profile. The second paint was formulated according to the model with a high KU (115), high ICI (1.5), an elongational rheology profile with a relatively fast reduction in filament diameter, and a relatively Newtonian rotational rheology profile. Note that once the KU is increased, it becomes more difficult to achieve a fast filament reduction and Newtonian rheology profile. However, for the paint at a high KU and high ICI we chose a thickener package that gave the fastest filament reduction and most Newtonian rheology behavior possible (Figures 10 and 111).
Figure 10. Rotational rheology profile of BASF formulations with low and high KU viscosities
 
Figure 11. Elongational rheology profile of BASF formulations with low and high KU viscosities
 
The two formulated paints were then compared to three of the commercial paints. The most preferred paint from the initial DIY Live Rollout Study (Paint C) was included as one of the commercial Paints as Paint 1. Using the same quantitative paint transfer test as was used in the benchmarking study above, the BASF formulated paints showed slightly less paint pickup and transfer compared to the preferred commercial paint (Paint 1), but significantly more than average commercial paints (Paints 2 and 3; Table 3). Further, the paints were evaluated subjectively based on application feel by a panel of four judges on a scale from 1–5 using similar methods as in the live DIY Rollout Study (1 = worst; 5 = best). On average, the BASF formula with a high KU (115) and high ICI (1.5) ranked highest among the all paints tested here (Table 4). Finally, the smoothness of each paint was measured using the Quantitative Smoothness test described above. Figure 12 shows that the BASF formulas have a comparable surface roughness to the most preferred commercial Paint 1. Overall, these results show that the model developed from the benchmarking study serves as a good starting point to formulate a paint that results in a positive painting experience with high DIY consumer satisfaction.
Table 3. Paint transfer of BASF formulated paints vs. Commercial paints
Paint	Paint picked up
by the roller (g)	Paint transferred from
the roller to substrate (g)
Paint 1	50.4	3.6
Paint 2	43.0	3.0
Paint 3	44.8	3.6
BASF
Low KU / High ICI formula	47.5	3.4
BASF
High KU / High ICI formula	48.7	3.3
*Note: Commercial Paint 1 is the same as Paint C from the initial DIY Live Rollout Study
Table 4. Application feel of BASF formulated paints vs. Commercial paints.
	Paint 1	Paint 2	Paint 3	BASF
Low KU / High ICI
formula	BASF
High KU / High ICI
formula
Judge 1	3	3	5	2	5
Judge 2	4	4	2	3	4
Judge 3	5	1	4	4	3
Judge 4	4	3	4	5	5
Average	4	2.75	3.75	3.5	4.25
Ranking 1 – 5 (1 = worst feel; 5 = best feel)
*Note: Commercial Paint 1 is the same as Paint C from the initial DIY Live Rollout Study
Figure 12. Surface Roughness of BASF formulated paints vs. Commercial paints
 
*Note: Commercial Paint 1 is the same as Paint C from the initial DIY Live Rollout Study
VI) Conclusions
The live DIY consumer roll-out study along with a comprehensive benchmarking study of >20 commercial paints gave insights into physical paint parameters which result in DIY consumer satisfaction. The most significant parameters identified here include balancing a relatively high KU and ICI viscosity with fast reduction in filament diameter (elongational rheology), and a more Newtonian rotational rheology profile. Further, this study illustrates the value of developing quantitative measurements when trying to establishing correlations or applying statistical analysis tools to develop predictive models for systems that traditionally are described by qualitative factors.
Acknowledgement . We thank Brandon Achord, Kyle Flack, Nicholas Foley, Kaliappa Ragunathan, Christina Nebel, Amy Ethier, Adam Cummings, and Bill Rosano for supporting this work.
References
1.	R.W. Bassemir and R. Krishnan, Practical Applications of Surface Energy Measurements in Flexography , FLEXO (July 1990).
2.	A. Ethier, A. Cummings, Quantifying Paint Surface Smoothness: Presented at the 32nd Biennial Western Coatings Symposium and Show, Las Vegas, NV, Oct. 2015.

